# MAST 2019 Contest and Licensing Terms

1. By submitting for consideration to the Contest, you agree to abide by these Contest and Licensing Terms.
2. The Contest is open to entrants from all nations, but written submissions must be in English. All communication relating to the Contest will be in English.
3. By submitting work to the Contest, you warrant that the work is original, and that you have rights and authority to submit and license the work. Any discovery to the contrary may disqualify your submission. Any use of elements within your work that are owned by parties other than those submitting the work, including poetry and song lyrics, may disqualify your submission.
4. Awards are determined by the sole discretion of judges appointed by Salt Lake Film Society (SLFS) and MAST. Though measures are contemplated to accomplish balanced, anonymous judging, no guarantees, warranties, or representations of any kind are given concerning the Contest outcomes, the judging process and rubric, or the judges themselves, their associations, or their preferences. You agree to abide by the decision of SLFS, MAST, and its judges.
5. By submitting work to the Contest, you hereby grant SLFS, MAST, and its affiliates unlimited but non-exclusive license to publish, reference, combine, and promote the work for a period of 3 years. Written and video work may only be published in part, with attribution. Still image and illustration work may be published in full, with attribution. Publication may occur online or offline, digitally, in print, or by exhibition.
6. If your work is selected for an award, you hereby grant SLFS, MAST, and its affiliates unlimited but non-exclusive license to publish in full, reference, and promote the work for a period of 3 years, with attribution. Publication may occur online or offline, digitally, in print, or by exhibition.
7. If the Contest results in your being awarded a production budget, you understand that further participation will require your agreement to additional terms which will grant SLFS, MAST, and its affiliates unlimited license to publish in full, distribute, re-license, submit to festivals, combine, reference, and promote the resulting work in perpetuity, though it is contemplated that such a license shall be exclusive only for a period of 1 year.
8. This agreement is made within the jurisdiction of the State of Utah.
9. Should any dispute arise from your submission to or participation in the Contest, you agree to seek resolution of the dispute exclusively by binding arbitration.